Geospatial intelligence has become an important concept in homeland security. As criminal gangs and terror groups continue to use sophisticated strategies to achieve their goals, the need to use emerging technologies in fighting their activities has become critical. The United States has taken lead in the use of geographic information system, geographic positioning system, and unmanned aerial vehicles (GEOINT) to collect intelligence. These new technological concepts have transformed the approach that security forces use to collect data. They make the process easy and less risky for the intelligence gathering officers. Other developed countries such as Russia, China, the United Kingdom, and Canada are also embracing the same technology to enhance their homeland security. The focus of this thesis is to determine how the same GEOINT could be applied locally in the United Arab Emirates to enhance homeland security. In order to do so, it presents a literature review followed by a comprehensive analysis of questionnaires presented to a number of respondents, who all work in the UAE security sector. The findings reveal that the UAE needs to embrace the new technology to deal with the emerging security threats. The country has succeeded in creating a robust service industry, especially in tourism and air transport. The real estate industry and trade sector are also expanding rapidly as the government tries to reduce the country’s reliance on the petroleum sector. However, the sustainability of the growth depends on the ability of the government to ensure that residents and visitors are safe. The new technology will help the country to deal with the threat posed by regional extremists such as ISIL and Al Qaeda. The country’s security forces should use geospatial intelligence to gather intelligence and determine how to counter any terror attack or acts of crime. If necessary, drones can be used in armed combat when dealing with criminal gangs. I wish to express my deepest gratitude to my life coaches: my parents, and my life partner: my husband, many thanks, because I owe it all to you.
I am also grateful to my family who have provided me full support throughout my research. They were always keen to know what I was doing and how I was proceeding.
A very special gratitude goes out to my thesis advisor Dr. for her assistant. She consistently allowed this paper to be better by steering me in the right direction. I am indebted to her for her valuable comments on this thesis.
I would also like to thank the experts who participated in the questionnaire for this research. Without their passionate contribution and input, the research could not have been successfully conducted.
Finally, last but no means least, thanks to my manager Major and my work colleague Dr. for supporting me along the way.
The events of the September 11, 2001 Al Qaeda attack have had profound impact on the approach that countries take to counter various threats to security. Before then, the focus of many countries was to have a strong army capable of defending the country against external threats. Lowenthal and Clark (2016) explain that it never occurred to the United States that a small group of extremist could plan and execute a serious attack in the manner that the Al Qaeda did in 2001. The country was shaken as the attack focused on strategic places, including the Pentagon, which is the United States Department of Defense headquarters (Thomas, 2018). For a moment, the country was gripped with fear as it was not clear which other strategic building would be targeted by the attackers. It was a major surprise when it became evident that the attack had been planned, financed, and executed by an organization that had less than 1000 followers under the leadership of Osama bin Laden (Steiner, 2014). It was not the first act of terror planned and executed by Al Qaeda. In 1998, the same outfit had succeeded in planting explosives in American embassies in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Over 5,000 people were killed in these attacks (Chaliand & Blin, 2016). The United States realized that it had to redefine its approach of combating terrorism and other threats to homeland security.
The United States is not the only target of acts of terror. On April 3, 2017, Saint Petersburg metro station suffered a terror attack when an explosive device went off, killing many innocent civilians. In Western Europe, Germany, Britain, Spain, Belgium and France have suffered various incidences of terror attacks. A well-known example was the Charlie Hebdo attack, which took place on January 7, 2015, where an extremist group organized and executed one of the worst cases of terror attacks in the country (Suárez, 2017). A group of gunmen walked into the premises of this press firm and opened fire indiscriminately at everyone on their way, killing many people in the process. These incidences forces countries to be proactive when it comes to enhancing security. As Said (2015) notes, it is no longer tenable for countries to take a reactive approach of dealing with terror attacks and other acts that threaten national security.
Intelligence gathering has become core part of fighting acts of terror and threats to national security that may be sponsored by enemy states or extremist groups. The intelligence community has been playing a critical role in gathering information critical in enhancing security. Intelligence is collected in many ways – from human sources and agents, which is called Human Intelligence (HUMINT), openly available materials which is called Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) technical sources that include Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT) which serves to detect, track and identify the signatures of target sources, Signals Intelligence (SIGINT) gathered from interception of signals, and Geospatial Intelligence (GEOINT) which uses remote sensing, geographic information system, unmanned aerial vehicle to capture image and utilize geospatial data as close to real-time as possible. Image data collection and analysis is the fastest way to get information to decision makers.
The concept of geospatial intelligence, popularly known as GEOINT, has gained massive popularity over the last decade as an effective proactive approach of dealing with threats. According to The United States National Geospatial Intelligence Agency (NGA), GEOINT which is considered the eyes of the intelligence community, refers to an “exploitation and analysis of imagery and geospatial information to describe, assess, and visually depict physical features and geographically referenced activities on the Earth” (Brown, 2015, p. 45). Geospatial Intelligence refers to everything on earth having a relational aspect in space and time. When you look at data and how they interact in the world in relation to specific places and specific times, its geospatial. Therefore geospatial information is the information that identifies a natural or constructive feature on earth by its geographic location and other characteristics. GEOINT allows to understand what is happening without having to be there.
Anyone who makes national policy decision, fights wars, and locates targets relies on GEOINT. Security services use GEOINT to detect the threat and know before they get there what they can expect, where these people are placed and what equipment are over there so they know exactly what to do and how to effectively get the job done. It has become critical for the intelligence agencies to go beyond using of spies to gather information critical in countering threats to homeland security. Geospatial intelligence makes it possible to monitor strategic geographical locations, especially places believed to be soft spots for terrorists and other criminals, with the goal of identifying any possible threat to peace and security. The emergence of unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) has made it possible for the military agencies and other law enforcement officers to monitor suspicious events and to plan effective counter attacks (Raman, 2013). Fitted with powerful cameras, a drone can help in collecting real-time information about a security breach and the pattern it is taking for effective planning of mitigation measures.
The United Arab Emirates is one of the fastest developing economies in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. The city of Dubai is currently one of the top business hubs and tourists’ destination in the world. The emirate of Dubai has successfully managed to diversify its economy over the past decade. Tourism, air transport, hospitality, and trade are currently the main pillars of the economy. However, Miller (2013) warns that these economies are sensitive to the issue of insecurity. Any threat to security may have devastating impact on the growth of these sectors. The United Arab Emirates has remained a relatively peaceful and secure country despite the emergence of Arab Spring that affected the MENA region (Brown, 2015). It is worrying that some of the regional countries have remained volatile over the past seven years. Libya, Yemen, Iraq, and Syria are some of the most affected countries in the region. Many people fleeing these countries have to be accommodated in different peaceful countries, including the UAE. The problem is that the regional instability has led to the emergence of terror outfits such as ISIS.
Al Qaeda has also benefited a lot from the instability. Janmohamed (2017) notes, it is not easy to predict actions of these extremist groups. They have the potential of attacking any city in the region, and that is a major concern to regional leaders. Having an effective intelligence agency that can detect threat at the right time has never been more important to this country than it currently is (Rubin & Rubin, 2015). The military and law enforcement agencies need to know activities of these terror groups in the region and some of their possible targets. They also need to know if those who are admitted as tourists in the country are part of the terrorist planning to attack civilians in the country. Geospatial intelligence offers a good platform that can help the country’s security agencies to monitor activities of these groups and to plan effective ways of dealing with them, which will be explained in the next chapter. The aim of the study is to investigate the role and applications of geospatial intelligence in homeland security, and to explore how the concept can be applied to enhance the United Arab Emirates’ homeland security.
Problem Statement The geopolitical position of countries in the Middle East puts them in a precarious position in terms of security. It is important to note that the focus of this paper is not political but security in nature. It might not be possible to separate politics from issues of security, as LaFree, Dugan, and Miller (2015) observe, but the focus of the paper is on security. Many countries in the MENA region are rich in oil reserves, one of the most important commodities in the international market for the last century. Studies have proven that powerful nations like United States and Russia keen on controlling the regional oil reserves often fuel the political instability in some of these countries (Udochukwu, Christian, & Adebayo, 2014).
Libya, Iraq and Syria are no longer stable and terror groups such as ISIS and Al Qaeda have infiltrated these territories as safe heavens to plan and execute their activities. Irrespective of the cause, insecurity is a major cause of concern in the region.
The infrastructure needed to facilitate exploitation, processing, and transportation of petroleum products are sensitive to any form of damage. Any major leak in the oil pipeline can have devastating environmental consequences on the area affected. Any form of attack on these pipelines cannot only have serious consequences on the environment but also safety of the people. Moreover, most of them are expensive and any destruction may cause serious negative consequences on the normal business operations of the affected firm. As explained above, the United Arab Emirates, especially the emirate of Dubai, has developed a robust service sector (Ganor, 2015). The service sector is just as delicate as the oil and gas sector when it comes to terror attack. It means that although the United Arab Emirates is enjoying years of economic prosperity, any major attack can cause a negative transformation, as major pillars of the economy will be affected. Geospatial intelligence is currently considered an important approach of ensuring that security is enhanced.
It is important to note that using GEOINT to manage security may not be easy. Other than the complex nature of the technology involved, there is the legal aspect that cannot be ignored. In the United States, law enforcement agencies are expected to get court order before conducting surveillance on a private property. The law protects citizen’s privacy, and any form of surveillance is considered a breach of that privacy (Hanhimäki & Blumenau, 2013). The complex nature of the legality of geospatial intelligence has been one of the major problems when using this approach of enhancing homeland security. Some of the criminals and extremists groups operating in the country would never give consent to the security officers to survey their premises. On the other hand, the law enforcement agencies need to conduct the regular surveillance to identify and deal with any threat. It is not possible to have court orders every time the security organs want to collect aerial data. In the United Arab Emirates, tourism is currently one of the main pillars of economy. Tourists want to be assured of their security while at the same time they want privacy. When they realize that their activities are under surveillance, they would become uncomfortable. Others may even consider visiting other regions. It means that when looking at the applicability of geospatial intelligence in enhancing homeland security, legal issues, and comfort of citizens and tourists should be considered.
Purpose of the Study The primary objective of this study is to explore the significance and application of geospatial intelligence in homeland security. The special interest of this project is to determine how the United Arab Emirates (UAE) can enhance border and homeland security using the emerging technologies of gathering intelligence. It is a fact that in this region, security is a major challenge even to relatively peaceful countries such as the United Arab Emirates, and the other GCC countries. Protecting the borders becomes a major challenge, especially in countries that border regions, which are currently affected by the Arab Spring (Janmohamed, 2017). GCC countries bordering Yemen, Syria, and Iraq face a serious problem of ensuring that their borders remain safe. It should also be remembered that hostile nations such as Iran also pose a serious security threat. That makes it necessary to secure the borders. The activities of the enemy should be monitored to ensure that whenever they plan an attack, countermeasures could be put in place within the right time to protect residents of the country and their property.
Geospatial intelligence offers the solution needed to overcome the emerging challenges. The paper will look at who should be involved in managing border security using the new technology. As mentioned above, the responsibility of managing border and homeland security should not be left to the security service. The judiciary also has a role to play. Once the criminals or terrorists are arrested, they have to be taken to court to be sentenced based on the existing laws of the land (Law, 2015). It means that actions taken by the law enforcement agencies must be within the law to ensure that the suspected culprits are punished as appropriate. As such, the study will look at the role of the judiciary in the fight against threat to homeland security using geospatial intelligence. Locally in the United Arab Emirates, the study will look at how the intelligence can be gathered effectively without making citizens and tourists uncomfortable.
The significance of geospatial intelligence on homeland security is a relatively new area of study as the nature of security threats continue to change with the emerging trends in communication technology. When conducting the study, it is necessary to narrow the focus to avoid cases where irrelevant data is collected. Zarakol (2011) warns that when there is no proper guidance on which data is needed, it is possible that a researcher would end up gathering information that does not directly respond to research goals and objectives. As such, it is always advisable to develop research questions in line with the goal and objectives of the study. These questions dictate the kind of data that should be collected from primary and secondary sources. 
How can geospatial intelligence be applied to support homeland security in the UAE?
The primary research question directly responds to the research topic. Answering the questions makes it possible to meet the main goal of the study. Janmohamed (2017) argue that in many cases, it is often necessary to develop secondary research questions. They support the primary question by identifying smaller objectives that would lead to the realization of the primary goal of the study. The following secondary questions were developed:
What is the role of geospatial intelligence in homeland security missions?
How, when, and where can geospatial intelligence be an effective tool in supporting homeland security professionals and decision makers?
Who should be involved in the use of geospatial intelligence to promote homeland security?
Data obtained from primary and secondary sources will help in answering each of these questions.
Theoretical Background There are limited studies on geospatial intelligence in homeland security because the concept is relatively new in the UAE. However, it is necessary to appreciate that a few studies have looked at this topic from various angles. Looking at the findings made by these scholars will enhance understanding of the issue under investigation. When reviewing literature, one of the primary areas of interest will be to look at some of the theories relevant to this study. The theoretical background makes it possible to understand some of the concepts that have been developed by other scholars to help explain the issue at hand. One of the most important concepts that will be used is the Mosaic theory of intelligence gathering. The primary focus of this study is on how government agencies can collect necessary information in time to help deal with security threats. As such, this theory will be of critical importance. It will also be necessary to look at some of the theoretical concepts regarding managing security within a given area. Some of the concepts that will be critical include clash of civilization. Others include post-structuralism and realism. Each of these theories will be discussed in details in chapter 2 of the thesis.
National security is an issue that has attracted extensive research from various scholars for the past several decades. The nature of security threats keep changing. The theoretical background helps in identifying some of the notable concepts and beliefs that have been developed by scholars in the security sector in the past. It is necessary to look at some of these theories and concepts that have been developed, and determine their relevance in light of the issue being investigated in this paper. Some of the theories and concepts that were considered appropriate in this study include the mosaic theory of intelligence gathering, risk society, clash of civilization, post-structuralism, and realism.
Mosaic theory of intelligence gathering The theory holds that it is necessary to gather small and separate pieces of intelligence and use them to construct a unified picture of an issue that is of interest (Briant, 2015). It is based on the belief that it may not always be possible for the government to gather all the needed information from one source to understand a given issue. As such, it is advisable to gather different bits of information from different sources, find a link between them, and then develop a complete picture of the problem under investigation. This theory is relevant to this study. The national government of the United Arab Emirates has a responsibility to protect its citizens. The responsibility can only be taken with success if data can be collected from various sources and processed appropriately to understand the nature of threat to national security. In many cases, it may not be possible to use one system to gather all the information needed. It may be necessary to use various platforms to collect such data. The use of intelligence officers, as has been traditionally the case, is still important. However, the security agencies stand a better chance of fighting crime is intelligence gathering also include the use of GEOINT. The information gathered by spies could make a greater sense if it is supported by data that is obtained using GIS and remote sensing machines (Heather, 2018). It will be easy to plan a counterattack against any threat to national security.
Risk society The concept of risk society is defined by Briant (2015) as “a society that is increasingly preoccupied with the future (and also with safety), which generates the notion of risk” (p. 43). When the society constantly focuses in the current development to enhance sustainability and future success of the country, it is impossible to ignore the potential risks that it faces. The government and citizens will always focus on factors that may affect the ability to achieve goals meant to make the future better for the citizens. The concept is very relevant to this study, given that the focus is to determine how to apply GEOINT in enhancing security of the United Arab Emirates. The Vision 2021 of the UAE is a long-term plan, which aims at transforming the country into one of the best in the world in various respects (Heather, 2018).
The plan is meant to improve the health sector, employment opportunities, transport infrastructure, and most importantly to diversify the country’s economy and reduce its reliance on the oil and gas sector. In an attempt to achieve these goals, the country must be conscious of the risks that the society faces. One of the biggest threats to the country’s Vision 2021 is insecurity. The threat posed by terror organizations such as ISIS and Al Qaeda is real (Chaliand & Blin, 2016). The service sector that is currently booming in Dubai can be destroyed when there is insecurity. It means that managing homeland security must be the top of the government’s agenda as it focuses on achieving the vision. GEOINT promises to be an effective way of dealing with this threat. Using modern technology to gather intelligence and to plan attacks and counterattacks against security threats will enhance homeland security in the country.
The Study Scope It is necessary to discuss the scope of the study for the benefit of those who may find this thesis relevant in their studies or policy-making. The primary goal of the study is to investigate the application of geospatial intelligence in missions of homeland security as a way to counter terrorism, Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP), and enhance border security. Data collection will specifically focus on these areas of study. The information will be collected from published sources such as books, government reports, online platform, and other reliable sources. The methodology is discussed further in chapter 3.
It is important to note that this thesis focuses on how the GEOINT can be applied in the local context of the United Arab Emirates. It means that factors that are unique to this country were taken into consideration. It would be necessary for those applying the recommendations made in this thesis to consider these facts. For instance, the recommendations in this thesis can be applied in regional countries that share the same geopolitical environment such as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The information may require some modification if it is to be applied in Europe, North America, Far East, and parts of Africa that do not share the same factors that the UAE faces when it comes to dealing with the issue of security.
Research limitations include confidential reports regarding GEOINT. Although there are several studies and researches about GEOINT, it is difficult to acquire data as the most significant data are confidential. Thus, this research will only investigate published material and publicly available data. The investigation of this study is limited and more empirical support is required.
Terminology Definition It is necessary to define some of the technical terms and common abbreviations used in the study. Although some of them are defined within the text, it is necessary to list all of them here to make it easy to understand the document. The following are the terminologies and abbreviations:
CIP- Critical infrastructure protection: a strategy and mechanisms put in place by government agencies to protect important infrastructures such as oil pipelines, roads, rail, airports, and seaports (Thomas, 2010).
GCC- Gulf Cooperation Council: an intergovernmental political and economic union that brings together all Arab countries in the Persian Gulf with exemption of Iraq (Janmohamed, 2017).
GEOINT-Geospatial intelligence: refers to intelligence gathered about human activities on earth collected using aerial devices (Nacos, 2016).
GIS- Geographic information system; it refers to a system that is designed to capture, analyze, manage, store, and present geographic data (Deogawanka, 2015).
GPS- Global Position System: it is a radionavigation system used to provide geolocation of a given object anywhere on or near the earth at any given time (Conrado, Neville, Woodworth, & O’Riordan, 2016).
Homeland Security: it is a department within the United States responsible for maintaining security of Americans and their properties within the country. In a general context, it refers to the general security of people and properties within the national border (Biltgen, 2016).
ISIS- Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, sometimes known as ISIL- Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: is an Islamic extremist group that is predominantly based in the politically unstable countries in the MENA region (Briant, 2015).
MENA- Middle East and North Africa: it has 22 member states from the Middle East and North Africa, which are predominantly Islamic states (Scott & Howlett, 2018).
RS- Remote Sensing: the process of scanning the earth using high-flying aircraft or satellite to obtain specific information (Asmat, 2012).
UAE- United Arab Emirates: It is the country of interest in this study within the GCC.
UAV- Unmanned Aerial Vehicle: it refers to an aircraft that is controlled remotely hence does not need to have a pilot on board (Deogawanka, 2015). It is mostly used for surveillance or in transporting explosive.
Organization of the Thesis It was necessary to have a proper structure for this thesis to ensure that the set objectives are achieved. The first chapter is the introduction. It provided a detailed background of the topic, statement of the problem, and purpose of the study. It also outlines research questions, and scope of the study. The second chapter is the literature review. It explores studies that have been conducted regarding geospatial intelligence in various countries, especially in the United States. It looks at how GEOINT can contribute to achieving the mission of homeland security. Chapter 3 defines the method used to collect and analyze data. It defines the design, data collection method, treatment, and analysis procedure. Chapter 4 provides the findings made from the analysis of data. It explains how GEOINT can help in promoting homeland security. It also demonstrates how the concept can be applied in the GCC, specifically in the United Arab Emirates. Chapter 5 provides a summary of the paper and recommendations based on the findings made from the study.
Literature Review In the previous chapter, background information about the topic has been provided. Goals and objectives that should be realized by the end of the study are also outlined. In this section, the aim is to provide a detailed review of literature in this field. According to Ahmad (2018), reviewing literature is important because it enables a researcher to understand what other scholars have found out in that field and the knowledge gaps that needs to be addressed. Conducting a review of literature also helps in avoiding cases where information that already exists is duplicated in a new study. Reproducing information that is in public domain does not help to improve knowledge in that field. This chapter starts by discussing the concept of homeland security. Major threats to lives of people and their property are discussed in this section. It then goes ahead to define the concept of geospatial intelligence and the way it has become critical in enhancing national security. The next section looks at the stages in the implementation of geospatial intelligence to counter terrorism and other criminal acts within the country. The chapter then discussed the growing popularity of GEOINT in various parts of the world. Looking at some of the theoretical concepts will also enhance understanding of the issue being investigated. The last section of this chapter is the identification of the research gap that needs to be addressed using primary data.
Homeland Security The concept of homeland security emerged in 2002 when President George W. Bush created the Department for Homeland Security as a direct response to the September 11, 2001 terror attack. Since then, the concept of homeland security has gained massive popularity in the country and other parts of the world. The Department of Homeland Security defines the concept as “a national security, especially with regard to the threat of terrorism within a country’s borders” (January, 2018, p. 78). Scholars and experts in the security sector are yet to come up with a universally acceptable definition of the term homeland security. However, there is a universal belief that the concept is used in reference to safety of people and their property within the national borders of a country. It is important to look at the threats to homeland security, including the event that led to the creation of the concept.
September 11, 2001 Al Qaeda Attack The United States has always been investing many resources in the security sector to ensure that its borders are secure and that its people are not subjected to any threat. According to Chaliand and Blin (2016), as one of the superpowers in the world, the country is constantly under threat of attack by hostile nations. For a long time, until the fall of the USSR in 1991, the focus of the country security organs has been on monitoring actions of Russia and its allies because of the belief that they have the potential to organize and execute devastating attack using nuclear weapons. It never occurred to the security forces that the country was in greater danger of serious attack from terrorists. That changed on September 11, 2001 when a terrorist group, Al Qaeda that was then headed by Osama bin Laded, organized and executed one of the worst attacks in the country’s modern history.
On September 11, 2001 at about 8:46 a.m., American Airline Flight 11 that was en route to Los Angeles with 92 people on board, including the five terrorists, was flown directly into the Northern Tower of the World Trade Center (Hanhimäki & Blumenau, 2013). After about 15 minutes, the second plane, United Airlines Flight 175, flown into the Southern Tower of the World Trade Center at 9:03 a.m. It had 51 passengers, 9 crewmembers, and 5 hijackers (Law, 2015). At this moment, it was apparent that the country was under attack. At 9:30 a.m., the third plane, American Airlines Flight 77, was flown into western part of pentagon, the headquarters of the United States Department of Defense (Nacos, 2016). The country was gripped with panic, as it was not clear when and where the next strike would be. The bold decision of attacking the headquarters of the country’s defense forces meant that the White House was no longer safe for the president. Indeed the hijackers had taken control of the fourth plane, United Airline Flight 93, and the target could have been the official residence of the United States president. The passengers on board this plane, upon learning the fate of other planes, wrestled with the hijackers and the plane crashed into a field in Pennsylvania at about 10:03 a.m.
The attack left 2,996 people dead and 6000 people suffered varying degree of injuries (Nacos, 2016). Majority of the casualties were within the buildings targeted by the attackers or close to them. The attack also had a devastating impact on property, especially the buildings that were directly hit. Most importantly, it became apparent that the United States was at a great risk of terror attack from terror groups. The country realized that although the threat posed by hostile states such as Russia and its allies could not be ignored, terrorists posed even greater threat. The fact that they are non-state actors and are not answerable to any government or international body makes them highly unpredictable. The fact that a small group of people, headed by Osama Bin Laden who was not even an army general, could organize, and execute one of the most devastating terror attacks in the United States modern history was shocking. The investigation that was conducted soon after the attack revealed that one of the main weaknesses demonstrated by the country’s security organs and intelligence agencies was the inability to have the right information available within the right time for the right team of security organs within the country. The CIA and FBI had gathered intelligence that a small terror outfit, led by bin Laden, was planning an attack within the country (Hanhimäki & Blumenau, 2013). The investigations had revealed that the team was targeting planes, but it was not clear what exactly they were planning to do. The limited information that the security organs received delayed their ability to take appropriate precautionary steps, leading to one of the worst disasters in the country’s history. Security experts believe that this attack would have been avoided at various stages if the country’s law enforcement agencies and intelligence units could have coordinated their activities and conducted a thorough surveillance into the activities of these criminals. Since then, the United States has taken seriously the issue of intelligence gathering and sharing of information among different government departments.
The Emergence of ISIS The threat to homeland security has become a major issue not only in the United States but also in different countries around the world. The emergence of extremists in the Middle East is a major concern not only to the regional countries but also to others in the world (Nacos, 2016). One of the terror groups, which have grown rapidly over the recent past, is the ISIS. When the government of Saddam Hussein was brought down in Iraq, it created a power vacuum that was filled by terrorists. The collapse of the government of Afghanistan following the War on Terror also made it easy for this group to expand. Unlike Al Qaeda that had a problem of recruiting a large army because of the limited financial resources, ISIL had a unique strategy of taking control of oil field, which enabled them to have a sustainable flow of income. It has been able to recruit people from North America, Europe, Africa, and other Asian countries. According to Law (2015), most of the attacks organized and executed by this terror group often target regional countries, especially Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, Pakistan, Libya, Turkey, Yemen, and Saudi Arabia. European and North American countries have also suffered various attacks from this group.
In October 2015, a Metrojet Flight 9268 from Egypt en route to Saint Petersburg was bombed, killing all the 224 people on board, majority of whom were Russians travelling back home after a holiday in the North African country. ISIL claimed the responsibility (Suárez, 2017). In November 2015, a group of ISIL fighters opened fire in Paris, indiscriminately shooting at unarmed civilians in the city. Others took hostages while another groups used grenade. In the end, 130 lives were lost while another 368 people sustained serious injuries. On March 2016, suicide bombers who were members of ISIL attacked an airport and a metro station in Belgium, killing 32 people and wounding 340 others (Nacos, 2016). On July the same year, France was struck once again, this time a 31-year-old man drove a 19-tonne cargo truck into a crowd, killing 86 people and wounding 434 others (Suárez, 2017). In the same month, Germany was attacked when a young immigrant used a knife against innocent civilians. It was established that some of the immigrants who had come to the country as refugees were actually radicalized members of ISIL. In March 2017, the United Kingdom suffered an attack by this group when in Westminster that left six people dead and 49 others seriously wounded (Ahmad, 2018). The pattern shows that no country is safe from an attack by the emerging terror groups. The strategies used by ISIL and Al Qaeda shows that these terrorists often target unarmed citizens when it is least expected.
Homegrown Terrorism One of the major issues emerging in homeland security is homegrown terrorism, also known as domestic terrorism. Soon after the 2001 Al Qaeda attack in the United States, the concept of terrorism was viewed by many as an attack planned and executed by Islamic extremists, especially those from the Middle East (Law, 2015). However, a new wave of terrorism is emerging in different parts of the world where attackers are locals other than the expected group of people from the MENA region. Some of these individuals have never even left their home country. Nonetheless, they get strong conviction to attack fellow citizens because of personal beliefs influenced by propaganda spread by terror groups and the events taking place in the MENA region.
The emergence of various online communication platforms makes it easy for them to understand events going on in other parts of the world. Ahmad (2018) notes that most of these local terrorists may not have the opportunity to get the military training those others within the MENA region have. Jenkins, Croitoru, Crooks, and Stefanidis (2016) explain that they can learn how to make dangerous explosive through the internet. These criminals are just as dangerous as those who are outside the borders of the country. In fact, the ease with which they can strike any part of the country and the inability of the security organs to predict their actions make them more dangerous than their counterparts who are out of the country. It is necessary to look at some of the major attacks that have been planned and executed by local extremists in various parts of the world.
European and North America are currently some of the worst affected regions by the problem of homegrown terrorism. In 2014, Canada suffered two attacks by individuals who were born and brought up in the country. These attackers targeted civilians as a way of expressing their frustration with some of the foreign policies that the country has adopted. In July 2011, Anders Behring Breivik planted a bomb in a car in Oslo, killing eight people when it went off (Hanhimäki & Blumenau, 2013). He also organized another attack on the island of Utøya, killing another 69 people. The Norwegian expressed his displeasure towards Islam and the countries immigration policies that allowed people from the Middle East to seek refuge in the country. The London underground bombing on July 2005 and the Madrid train bombing of 2004 were also planned and executed by the locals (Nacos, 2016). Other countries such as the Netherlands, Italy, France, Australia, and Nigeria have also suffered from acts of terrorism committed by their citizens.
The United States is the worst affected country by the problem of homegrown terrorism. Ahmad (2018) explains that domestic terrorism in the United States can be traced back several years before the September 11 incident. However, the term terrorism was not in use during that period. One of the most memorable acts of terror in the country was the Oklahoma City Bombing that took place on April 19, 1985 (Hanhimäki & Blumenau, 2013). Timothy McVeing and Terry Nichols took time to develop explosives then loaded them into a truck before packing it in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. McVeing went ahead and detonated the explosive, which had disastrous outcome. One third of the building was wiped out by the explosion. The blast was so strong that it destroyed or damaged 324 other buildings, which were within a 16-block radius. Several cars and other structures were destroyed in the process. The incident left 168 people dead and 680 others injured (Hanhimäki & Blumenau, 2013). The terrorists claimed that their motive was to express their frustration with some of the policies made by the federal government.
The Boston marathon bombing of 2013 was one of the first major terror attacks in the country after the September 11 attack. Two brothers, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and Tamerlan Tsarnaev improvised a simple explosive using a pressure cocker. They placed the two bombs 190 meters apart in crowded placed where city residents were following the events of the marathon. The two homemade bombs went off, killing three people and wounding over 264 others. Security forces were able to identify the attackers who later admitted to their crime, stating that they were not happy with the continued presence of American soldiers in Afghanistan and Iraq (Nacos, 2016). This incident was very important to the American security agents because for the first time after creation of the Department of Homeland Security, a major attack took place in an area that had a high number of security agents because of the sporting event. It was a major demonstration of the existing weaknesses in the country’s security system.
The Orlando nightclub shooting that happened on June 12, 2016 is a more recent example of the dangers posed by homegrown terrorists. The lone-wolf terrorist, Omar Mateen, was a 29-year-old American who was working as a security guard. He was born in the United States, although his parents had emigrated from Afghanistan. Omar embraced the Muslim faith and believed that he had to be more loyal to his people back in Afghanistan than to the United States (Nacos, 2016). He did not like the United States foreign policies, especially the presence of the United States troops in Afghanistan and other parts of the Middle East. He purchased some of the most effective semi-automatic rifles and thousands of ammunitions. He then targeted a local LGBT nightclub in Orlando. The mass shooting, which left 49 people dead and 53 others wounded.
A year after the Orlando nightclub shooting, there was another major terror attack in the country, the Las Vegas shooting of 2017. The Las Vegas shooting presents a unique case of insecurity to homeland security. On October 1, 2017, Stephen Paddock, a 64-year-old man from Mesquite, Nevada, opened fire on concertgoers at Route 91 Harvest music festival (Thomas, 2018). Strategically positioned on a 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay hotel, he fired over 1,100 rounds, targeting those who were celebrating across the street. It is reported that 58 people died of gunshot wounds while 851 others were injured. He later committed suicide in his suite before the officers could arrest him. His case was unique because the investigations revealed that he had no links to ISIL or any other extremist groups. He was born and brought up in the United States and was not a Muslim. Before the incident, no one would have suspected that he would commit such a heinous crime. The analysis of his brain at Stanford University revealed that he had no serious mental disability. He left no evidence that could explain his motive.
Understanding the Concept of Geospatial Intelligence The concept of geospatial intelligence is increasingly becoming popular in the field of security management. Ahmad (2018) defines GEOINT as “intelligence about the human activity on earth derived from the exploitation and analysis of images and geospatial information that describes, assesses, and visually depicts physical features and geographically referenced activities on the earth” (p. 32). It is a new form of gathering intelligence with the help of the emerging technologies. According to Janmohamed (2017), the traditional method of gathering intelligence was to use Human Intelligence who would investigate an issue and gather necessary information. The emergence of aerial photography was seen as being important to scientists keen on studying the earth for various reasons. It then became evident that this technology could be used in the security sector to understand activities of the enemy within a given region.
In homeland security, GEOINT is increasingly becoming a crucial aspect of monitoring and gathering relevant information needed to enhance safety of people and properties. As explained in the section above, homeland security is currently affected by both internal and external threats. Although terror organizations operating beyond the borders of a country still pose a serious threat to the national security, there is also the issue of citizens who have decided to join terror groups and help them achieve their goals locally. Predicting when and how these criminals would act may sometimes be a major challenge. With the help of GEOINT, security organs can monitor suspicious activities and take necessary actions before members of the public can be put in harm’s way. It is necessary to evaluate different aspects of GEOINT and the manner in which they facilitate intelligence gathering and security management within the country.
Geographic Information System The geographic information system is one of the most important aspects of geospatial intelligence. January (2018) defines GIS as “a system designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyze, manage, and present all types of geographical data” (p. 78). It goes beyond collecting the physical data about a given geographical area. For instance, if it focuses on a school, it will provide the exact physical location of the institution, the number of students, teachers, and other non-teaching staff members, subjects taught in the institution, student capacity, and any other vital information that would be needed. As Janmohamed (2017) observes, GIS goes beyond the use of software to gather the physical factors of the issue under investigation. It also looks at other relevant information that may be needed. 
Remote Sensing Remote sensing is another strategy of gathering intelligence about a phenomenon or an object without having to be physically present within that location (Deogawanka, 2015). One can use aircrafts or satellite to collect the needed information within a specific geographic location. This concept has gained popularity in various scientific disciplines such as ecology, oceanography, hydrology, meteorology, geology, glaciology, and military science (Nacos, 2016). It is important to note that in each discipline, a different approach of collecting data would be needed to achieve specific goals. In the military, unmanned aircrafts have become effective when it comes to collecting data. Biltgen (2016) says that remote sensing makes it possible for the security organs to gather intelligence without having to send troops to the field. In the past, intelligence officers had to be sent to a specific location to gather specific information, including geographic maps of a given area to help the forces in planning an attack or a counterattack. However, that is no longer necessary because of the emergence of remote sensing. A few experts in the field of technology can collect such data without having to move out of the office. It is not only cost-effective way of gathering intelligence but also safe for the officers involved.
When using remote sensing, data can be gathered in two main strategies. The first strategy is passive sensing where sensors are used to gather radiation emitted by objects within a given area. In most of the cases, it uses the reflection of sunlight to gather information (Hanhimäki & Blumenau, 2013). The passive approach of gathering data is often used when there is need to monitor if there are movement of objects within a given location. Any abnormal changes in the reflections would indicate that a series of activities are taking place within the region of interest. The second strategy is the active collection where the satellite or sensor organ emits energy that scans objects within a given area to detect and measure radiations reflected in a given area. It is often used in cases where the detectors cannot rely on the sunlight, especially at night. Active collection of data, especially the use of LiDAR and RADAR, has gained popularity among the security personnel because of its ability to gather the needed data at any time and with greater efficiency. LiDAR stands for Light Detection and Ranging and it’s a remote sensing tool that uses ultraviolet, visible, or near infrared light to measure distance and create a 3D image of objects. It can tell the three-dimensional structure of an object even while moving. RADAR stands for Radio Detection Ranging which uses radio waves to scan the environment. Figure 2 below shows the two remote sensing strategies. 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles The use of UAV has become popular over the recent past. According to Nacos (2016), the United States intelligence agencies often found it challenging using manned airplanes to collect data, especially in volatile regions where the enemy had the capacity to bring such planes down using surface-to-air missiles. When that happened, the officer operating the plane would be taken captive or killed by the enemies. One of the biggest challenges of using these planes is that they were relatively large to accommodate the pilots. As such, they could be seen by the enemy, making them easy targets. The emergence of the unmanned aerial vehicles was considered a major solution to this challenge. Its small size meant that it could easily hover within a given region for a long time without being monitored. In case the enemy monitors it, there would be no casualty in case it is brought down. Others would be fitted with explosives to ensure that if they were brought down using surface-to-air missiles, they would turn into bombs. The enemy, knowing the danger of shooting such an explosive, may only launch complaint with the suspected agency instead of taking it down. The fact that the plane would explode before touching the surface of the earth means that the intelligence gathered will be destroyed before it could land in the hands of the enemy. The unmanned aerial vehicle is often used in two main ways. Intelligence gathering is one of the first and most important uses of UAV. January (2018) argues that the unmanned aerial vehicles have become the most useful tools in collecting information within a given area. These vehicles are fitted with powerful cameras and sensors to help monitor activities within a given area. Advanced technologies have made it possible to ensure that information collected using this instrument is relayed in real time without having to wait for it to land. It means that the vehicle can remain in the air for as long as it may be necessary to collect the needed information by the security agents. This technology also helps in case the enemy brings down the vehicle. The data collected will not be lost. Biltgen (2016) notes that most of these drones are currently fitted with explosives to ensure that if it is intercepted by the enemy, it explodes to avoid cases where enemies can use the collected information or the aircraft itself for their self-interest. The drones are also used in active combat in regions where the enemy has the potential to bring down warplanes. Nacos (2016) explains that during the Vietnam War, many American planes were brought down by the enemy forces. Such incidences not only cause a massive destruction of military hardware but it also leads to loss of lives of the jet pilots and other officers in these planes. The emergence of drones was a major breakthrough in the United States’ military capacity. Instead of using the expensive aircrafts, soldiers can use these drones fitted with explosives to attack the enemy. Janmohamed (2017) says that using the drones in the battlefield is like playing a zero-sum game with the enemy. When the plane is brought down within the territories of the enemy, it will explode, and people within the area will be hurt. If the enemy decides not to bring it down, the bombs will be dropped, which is just as bad as downing the plane. This equipment has been used widely by the United States army in Syria, Iraq, and Somalia to fight extremist groups. In Libya, it was used by the west to attack Muammar Gaddafi’s convoy, making it easy for the rebels to abduct and kill him (Nacos, 2016). Figure 4 below is a drone fitted with a multirole missile, ready for an action.
Stages of Implementing GEOINT in Counterterrorism Deogawanka (2015) explains that the threat to homeland security is an issue that does not just affect the United States of America but all other nations around the world. The study of the activities of terror groups and other terrorists show that both developed and developing nations are at risk. Europe, North America, Africa, and parts of Asia have all suffered from the activities of such criminal groups (Monaco, 2018). Using the emerging technologies can help enhance homeland security. The following are the stages in which the security organs should use geospatial intelligence to fight crime:
Monitoring/Surveillance One of the first steps in fighting acts of terror is to gather intelligence about the activities of the terror groups to understand their plans. Biltgen (2016) says that the sophisticated nature of some of these terror groups makes it dangerous for the security agencies to take a reactionary tactic of dealing with them. Instead, the team must be proactive enough to know the plans of these individuals and take appropriate actions to protect lives of members of the public and their property. When using tools such as GIS and unmanned aerial vehicles, it is possible to identify the location of the threat, possible action that is being taken by the enemy, and the best way to organize a counter attack. The information gathered will make it possible for the team of security agents to determine if there are security threats that require urgent action by the officers or if the team can afford to wait just to ensure that its actions do not go against the law.
Preparedness The next step is the preparedness. In this case, the team will need to be ready for the action that might be taken by the enemy. In the Middle East, the threat of attack by ISIS and similar terror outfits is real. The problem is that most activities of these terror groups are conducted in foreign countries, especially the unstable regional countries such as Iraq and Syria. The international law limits the ability of the military forces to take action against criminals in another country (Nacos, 2016). Even if the intelligence agencies have gathered intelligence about the plans by ISIS in Syria to attack a city within the United Arab Emirates, this law require the Emirati forces to work with the government of Syria to launch attack against the extremists to avoid having a situation where the Syrian government will consider it an inversion. Sometimes the best course of action is to prepare for a counterattack. With the help of information gathered using these tools, the team will know how to counter such an attack and to ensure that the targeted institutions or places are offered maximum protection.
Response Dealing with common cases such as an attack by a terror group or local criminal gangs require the use of these emerging technologies. In the 2016, Dallas shooting that targeted white police officers, the team of law enforcement agencies tried to neutralize the attacker, Micah Johnson. The attacker succeeded in bringing down five police officers and wounding many others. The strategic location of the attacker and his military experience made it impossible for the police officers to go after him. A decision was made to use bomb disposal remote control vehicle (Janmohamed, 2017). This unmanned vehicle, fitted with bomb, was able to neutralize the threat without subjecting other officers to the threat of being shot at by the attacker. It was one of the best cases where GEOINT was used to respond to a threat to national security.
Mitigation It is important to note that sometimes the team may fail to detect a threat until it may be too late to stop it. For instance, some of the homegrown terrorists can blend so well with members of the public that it may not be possible to detect they are planning an attack until the attack actually occurs. Geospatial intelligence can be used in mitigating such cases. With the help of the unmanned vehicles, it is possible to counter an attacker before he or she can cause more harm to innocent citizens. In other cases, these information-gathering tools can be used to identify the specific location of a threat so that the rescue team can help victims to move to safety.
The Growing Popularity of GEOINT in the World The emerging technologies are becoming critical in managing the national security. Biltgen (2016) notes that not all the new technologies are effective enough to be embraced by the national security systems. Some of them are inventions that can be used in other fields and not on important matters as homeland security. Some of the issues that the law enforcement agencies and military have to deal with on a daily basis are so sensitive that trial and error can never be an option. Any mistake committed by the intelligence agencies, the police, and the department of defense can have devastating consequences. As such, it is advisable to ensure that proper care is taking when embracing new technologies. Before determining how GEOINT can be applied within a given country in the GCC, it is necessary to look at how it has been applied in other parts of the world.
Global application of GEOINT At a global level, GEOINT has proven to be the tool that can help counter the constant security threats that different countries have to deal with on a regular basis. The United States have a unique security challenge, some of which have been discussed above. However, one area of interest that is yet to be reviewed is border management. According to January (2018), protecting the United States’ border is one of the biggest challenges that security organs in the country have to deal with. The statistics show that the country is still one of the preferred destinations for economic immigrants and asylum seekers (Heather, 2018). It has one of the largest economies in the world and the rate of unemployment in the country is one of the lowest. The minimum wage rate is also one of the highest globally (Nacos, 2016). The healthcare system, the transport sector, and standards of living are some of the best.
The socio-cultural diversity in the country that is brought about by decades of immigration of people from all over the world also make many immigrants comfortable knowing that it is easy to find people they can identify with in the country. Deogawanka (2015) notes that many illegal immigrants, especially from South and Central America often try to pass through the country’s borders to live the American dream. Their mass movement into the country poses a serious security threat to homeland security because it is not easy to determine the true aim intention of such immigrants. The border patrol officers are currently using GEOINT to monitor activities along the border of the country. Using remote sensing and GIS technologies, they can determine when there is a mass movement of people towards the country’s border. The information gathered can help in making the right decision about when to send officers to the border and how the illegal immigrants should be treated based on the potential threat they pose to the country and to the officers at the time of arrest.
Mexico is another North American country that is facing serious security challenges. Smuggling of drugs and weapons are some of the primary challenges that the security forces in the country have to deal with (Heather, 2018). Some of the world’s largest drug cartels operate within the country. These organized armed gangs are very ruthless because of the nature of their business. They resent law enforcement agencies because of the fear that they may be arrested for engaging in illegal trade. As such, they often do not hesitate to kill officers that they view as a threat to their activities.