It happened one October afternoon last year, when Copper was still a first year student. He was with his uncle, the two of them standing on the roof of a department store in the Ginza district of Tokyo. A fine mist fell quietly and ceaselessly from the ashen sky, so that it was hard to tell if it was raining or not, and before they knew it, small silver droplets had fastened everywhere on Copper’s jacket and his uncle’s raincoat, and they looked as if they had been covered with frost. Copper was silent, gazing down at the Ginza Boulevard immediately below. From seven stories up, the Ginza was a narrow channel. At the bottom, cars streamed past in great numbers, one after another. From Nihonbashi on the right side, flowing beneath him to Shinbashi on the left, and from there in the opposite direction, from the left side back to Nihonbashi, the twin currents slipped past each other, waxing and waning as they went. Here and there between the two streams, a trolley crawled sluggishly by, looking somehow world-weary. The trolleys looked as small as toys, and their roofs were slick with rain. The cars, too, and the asphalt road surface and even the trees lining the road and all else that was there were dripping wet and gleaming with the brightness of daylight shining from who knew where. Gazing down in silence, Copper began to imagine that the individual cars were insects. If they were bugs, he thought, they would be rhinoceros beetles. They’re a swarm of rhinoceros beetles that comes crawling in a big hurry. Then once they’ve done their job, they go hurrying home. There’s no knowing what it’s about, but to them great affairs are happening, make no mistake. As Copper thought about the beetles, he noticed how the Ginza gradually narrowed in the distance, finally bending to the left, and there, where it vanished amid the tall buildings near Kyōbashi, didn’t it seem like the entrance to their nest? The little creatures, in their rush to return, disappear over there, one by one. And as they do, their replacements come hurrying back, one by one. A black one, a black one, again a black one, now a blue one, a gray one… The powdery mist continued to fall quietly as before. While immersed in his strange fantasy, Copper gazed for some time toward the Kyōbashi neighborhood and eventually raised his face. Below him, the rain-soaked streets of Tokyo spread boundlessly in all directions. It was a dark, lonely, endless prospect, and watching it, Copper began to feel gloomy, too. As far as the eye could see, the innumerable little roofs continued, all the while reflecting the light of the leaden sky. Breaking up the flat house rows, clusters of high-rise buildings poked up here and there. The farthest of these were gradually caught up in a haze of rain and at last became silhouettes floating between the sky and the vague dullness of the monochrome mist. How profoundly damp it must have been! Everything was wet through and through, and it seemed that even the rocks themselves were permeated with water. Tokyo was submerged, motionless at the bottom of the cold and damp. Copper had been born and raised in Tokyo, but this was the first time he had ever seen the streets of Tokyo show such a sad and somber face. The hustle and bustle of the city came welling up endlessly from the depths of the heavy wet air to the seventh-floor rooftop, but whether this registered in his ears or not, Copper just stood there, transfixed. For some reason, he had become utterly unable to look away. At that moment, something began to happen deep inside him, a change unlike anything that had happened to him before. Actually, this change in Copper’s heart is related to the story of how he got his nickname. What happened first was that Copper saw, floating before him, the rain beaten, dark winter sea. That image may have come back to him from memories of a time Copper went with his father to the Izu Peninsula on a winter holiday. As he watched the streets of Tokyo spreading far away into the mist, the city beneath him came to seem like a vast expanse of ocean, and the buildings standing here and there looked like crags jutting up from its surface. Above the ocean, the sky hung down, threateningly low. Copper, lost in the grip of his imagination, thought vaguely that there must be human beings living at the bottom of this ocean. But when he came to, for some reason, Copper shivered. Those little roofs packing the earth just like sardines— under those innumerable roofs were any number of human beings! While that was a natural thing, at the same time, when he thought it over, it gave him a sort of scary feeling. Right now, beneath Copper’s very eyes, as well as in places he couldn’t even see, some hundreds of thousands of people were living. How many different sorts of people were there? What were they all doing now, while Copper watched from above? What were they thinking? It was an unpredictable and chaotic world. The elderly in their eyeglasses, little girls with bobbed hair, young women with their hair done up, shopkeepers in aprons, office workers in their Western clothes—all manner of people were at once materializing before Copper’s eyes and again disappearing. “Uncle—” Copper started to speak. “I wonder how many people there are just in the places we can see from here.” “Hmm…” said his uncle. “I mean, if we estimate that we can see one-tenth or maybe one-eighth of the city of Tokyo from here, then wouldn’t the number of people be one tenth to one-eighth of the population of Tokyo?” “Well, it’s not quite that simple,” Copper’s uncle replied, laughing. “If Tokyo’s population were an average, even distribution everywhere you went, that would be correct—just as you say. But in actuality, there will be areas of heavy population density and, consequently, light areas as well, you see? So you ought to give proportional weight to these areas in your calculations. And what’s more, you have daytime and nighttime—the number of people will vary immensely, you know.” “Day and night? Why would it vary?” “Just think about it and you’ll see. You and I live outside of Tokyo, don’t we? But at the moment, here we are, at the very center of the city. And then when evening falls, won’t we go back home? There must be any number of other people like that.” Copper mulled this over. “Today is a Sunday,” his uncle continued, “but if it were a normal weekday, look at all the places you can survey from here—Kyōbashi, Nihonbashi, Kanda, Hongo. Every morning, from outside Tokyo, immense numbers of people come charging in. And then when evening comes, they pull out again, all at once. You know yourself how crowded the commuter trains and city trolleys and buses are during rush hour.” I should have thought of that, Copper said to himself. His uncle went on. “I suppose, to hazard a guess, one could say that there are some hundreds of thousands—no, maybe even, say, more than one million people—flowing in and out, rising and falling like an ocean tide, hmm?” Above the two of them in their conversation, the misty rain continued to fall. Copper and his uncle stood awhile in silence, gazing at the city of Tokyo laid out below them. Beyond the falling rain, shimmering and trembling, the darkened city streets continued to run off to places unknown, where not a single human figure could be seen. Yet below them, without a shadow of a doubt, hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions of people were thinking their own thoughts, doing their own things, and living their lives. Yes, and those people, every morning, every evening, were rising and falling like the tides. Copper felt as if he were drifting into a big whirlpool. “Hey, Uncle—” “Yes?” “People are…” Starting to speak, Copper turned a bit red. But he pulled himself together and spoke. “People are… Well, they seem a little like water molecules, don’t you think so?” “Indeed. If you are comparing human society to oceans and rivers, individual human beings could certainly be considered to be their molecules.” “And, Uncle, you’re a molecule, too, aren’t you?” “That’s right. And you are, too. An extra-small molecule, in fact.” “Don’t make fun of me! Molecules are automatically small, aren’t they? Uncle, you’re too long and thin to be a molecule!” While he was speaking, Copper looked down at the Ginza Boulevard just beneath them. Cars, cars, cars… Come to think of it, inside each one of those rhinoceros-beetle cars, there was, of course, a human being. By chance, Copper’s gaze settled on a single bicycle running along in the stream of automobiles. The man riding it was clearly still quite young. His billowing raincoat was wet and shiny. The young man was looking to the sides, looking back, noting with care a car that had passed him, the whole time pedaling with all his might. He sped along the asphalt road so slippery with rain, avoiding the cars to the right and left, all the while not dreaming that Copper was looking down at him from this high up. Just then, a gray car appeared out of nowhere, overtaking two or three cars in front of it. Look out! Up on the rooftop, Copper shouted in his heart. Any moment, he thought, the bicycle would be sent flying. Yet the young man below him swerved nimbly and let the car pass him by. Then in an instant, he had barely righted the tilting bicycle before he was off again, pedaling with all his might. The intense effort set his whole body in motion as he bore down on the pedals, one leg after the other. Was he a messenger from somewhere, running off on some errand? Of course, Copper couldn’t know. Here he was, observing this unseeing, unknowing young man from afar. And the object of his observation was totally unaware. To Copper, it was somehow a strange feeling. The place where the young man was riding was a spot that Copper and his uncle had driven past earlier that day, when they came to the Ginza. “Uncle, when we drove by down there,” Copper said, pointing below, “someone could have been watching from this rooftop.” “Yes, that’s true. That is, we can’t know for sure. In fact, there could be someone right now, perhaps, watching the two of us from a window somewhere!” Copper looked around at the nearby buildings. Which building, which building? There were so many windows. At his uncle’s words, all the windows seemed to face in Copper’s direction as he looked. But the windows just reflected the hazy brightness outdoors, each and every one, and shone like mica. Whether people were inside and could see them, he couldn’t know. Still, Copper couldn’t help feeling that somewhere unbeknownst to him, there were eyes watching him steadily. He even had the distinct impression that he could see his own figure reflected in those eyes—on a seven-story building in the hazy gray distance, a small, small figure standing on a rooftop! Copper had an odd feeling. The watching self, the self being watched, and furthermore the self becoming conscious of all this, the self observing itself by itself, from afar, all those various selves overlapped in his heart, and suddenly he began to feel dizzy. In Copper’s chest something like a wave began to pitch and roll. No, it felt as if Copper himself were pitching and rolling. Then, in the city spreading boundless before him, the invisible tide welled up to its highest point. Before he knew it, Copper had become just another droplet inside that tide. Staring blankly, Copper was silent for a long time. After a while his uncle spoke. “Are you all right?” Copper made a face like someone waking from a dream. And then, seeing his uncle’s face, he gave an awkward laugh. Several hours later, Copper and his uncle were riding in the car, headed home along the road to the suburbs. After leaving the department store, they had ducked into a theater to see a newsreel film, and then in the evening it was time to return the hired car, but by now it was completely dark. The rain continued to fall. They could see the trembling mist illuminated in the beam of the headlights. “Before, what were you thinking?” Copper’s uncle asked. “Before?” “On the department store rooftop. You were thinking hard about something, weren’t you?” Copper didn’t know what to say. So he stayed silent. His uncle, too, after that, asked nothing. The car ran rapidly away along the pitch-dark road. Eventually Copper spoke. “It was because I had a really strange feeling!” “How so?” “Well, because you were talking about the rising tide of people and the falling tide of people…” His uncle made a face as if to say he didn’t understand. At that, Copper spoke quickly, in a pronounced voice. “People, Uncle—they really are molecules, aren’t they? Today I really started to believe that.” Under the dim light of the car, his uncle widened his eyes in surprise. Didn’t Copper’s face seem exceptionally lively and intense? “Is that so?” his uncle said, and thought for a while, but presently he spoke, quietly and seriously. “Please remember that later. It’s extremely important.” That evening, Copper’s uncle was up late, at home in his study, writing something intently. At times he would give his hand a rest and puff on a cigarette, then some thought would occur to him, and again he would continue to write. That went on for an hour, or perhaps an hour and a half, but at last he set down his pen and closed the notebook in which he was writing. It was a large maroon clothbound notebook. The uncle, taking up a teacup that had been abandoned on his desk, drank down the now-cold tea in a single swallow, extended his arms in a broad stretch, and scratched his head vigorously. Then he lit a cigarette and puffed lazily for a while, but before long he opened a drawer in the desk and, tucking the notebook inside, finally turned out the light and went slowly off to bed. Now, it will be necessary for us to take a little peek inside this notebook. Hidden inside it is the reason that Honda Jun’ichi came to be called Copper.
Copper may have felt like a molecule living in the wide world, but he was still a boy in his first year of junior high school. His school friends were the only ones around him, the only people he saw every day. But this circle of friends was also a world of its own. In this smaller world there were two people with whom Copper was particularly close. One was Mizutani—he and Copper had become friends when they were classmates in elementary school, going back and forth between each other’s houses to play. The other was Kitami, whom everyone called Gatchin. Kitami and Copper were always shoulder to shoulder in the height lineup, as previously noted, so they had many chances to speak, but Copper hadn’t liked Kitami much at first. Mizutani was slender and good-looking, was always a calm presence, and had a sort of girlish shyness, but Kitami, well, he was the complete opposite of that. Kitami was as short as Copper, his build was as sturdy as a bulldog’s, and no matter what the situation, he never held back. Whatever he was thinking, he said it quickly, without hesitation, and once he had spoken out on something, whatever it was, there was little chance he’d take it back. “No matter what anyone says, I don’t like it.” When Kitami said this, there was nothing anyone could do. This “no matter what anyone says…” was Kitami’s trademark. He could be impossibly stubborn, so at some point some of the students had started calling him Gatchin, because it had a hard, stubborn sound. But Gatchin was a fairly likable young man, despite his stubborn moments. Once, on the way home from school, Copper and some friends got into an argument with Gatchin. The issue was, What sort of thing is electricity? In Kitami’s view, the idea that any substance could flow through solid metal, such as inside an electrical line, was unbelievable. So probably there was some sort of vibration being transmitted, he said, the same way light or sound worked. But Copper happened to know that an electrical current was made of electrons, which were even smaller than atoms, flowing away through the insides of the electrical lines. So he said that Kitami’s view was mistaken, but Kitami wouldn’t believe him at all. “Well, you must have read it wrong. Because, number one, there isn’t any space in the copper wire for the whatever to pass through, is there? It’s weird! No matter what anyone says, that’s impossible!” At which point Copper had no choice but to explain the structure of matter to Kitami, letting loose his full stock of knowledge from science magazines, his extracurricular physics book, his copy of Mysteries of the World, and so forth: that all matter is made up of particles so small they can’t be seen even with a microscope; that atoms in their turn are collections of even smaller electrons; that when we consider things as small as these, materials that we ordinarily think have no spaces or gaps at all actually are full of holes; and it’s for that same reason that the small waves of X-rays are able to pierce objects that ordinary light rays can’t get through. “Is that so?” said Gatchin, still unconvinced. At that point Copper came to a dead halt and from inside his bag removed a book that he happened to have right there on the spot, called The Story of Electricity, and showed the explanation of electrical currents to Kitami. This was a book written by a science professor. “Huh,” said Kitami, reading where Copper had pointed. Everyone stood still, waiting for his reply and wondering if even the stubborn Gatchin would now be forced to relent. Eventually Kitami looked up and said, “Okay, that’s right. No matter what anyone says…” When he started up again, everyone stared at Kitami, dumbfounded, and at that moment he followed up with “My way was totally wrong.” At this everyone heaved a sigh of relief. And Copper suddenly came to like Gatchin. But the two of them didn’t become really good friends until a little bit after that. For Copper, that happened on the occasion of the unforgettable Fried Tofu Incident. One day, on their way into the classroom, a friend named Hori latched onto Copper and said in a low voice, “You know about Uragawa? I hear that now everyone is calling him Fried Tofu.” “Really?” This was news to Copper. So when he asked why this was so, Hori, who was famous for gossip, explained while a sly smile floated up onto his face. “Because that kid Uragawa always brings fried tofu in his lunch box, every day. And it’s not even cooked with anything, just plain fried tofu.” “Huh.” “I heard that since this semester started, he’s had fried tofu every single day, except maybe four days. That’s probably why it always smells like fried tofu around Uragawa.” Copper thought that this was kind of an unpleasant story. “Okay,” he said, “but how did you learn that?” “That is, well…” And here Hori, after scanning the vicinity a little, now dropped his voice to a real whisper. “It’s a secret, but you know Yamaguchi, who sits next to Uragawa? Every day, he’s been quietly, carefully watching him, I heard. And then he told all his friends. But look, this is still a secret, okay? You didn’t hear it from me! Because Uragawa himself doesn’t even know yet.” Listening to this story, Copper had an ugly feeling. It seemed that listening to these rumors and spreading the nickname was no better than what Yamaguchi was doing, sneaking and spying on a person’s lunch box every day and sharing the news. Copper had seldom eaten fried tofu. On the rare occasions that it appeared at his dinner table, he usually finished his meal without touching it. There was something about it he just couldn’t stomach. And despite that, Uragawa was eating it every day— well, in all honesty, that did make Copper curious. But at the moment, Uragawa was stuck with it as a nickname, without knowing anything about it at all, which was somehow pitiful, and Copper didn’t have the heart to snicker about it together with Hori. Even leaving that aside, everyone had teased Uragawa over all sorts of things and made fun of him all year long. To tell the truth, one look at Uragawa was probably all anyone would need to feel that a whole lot of teasing might not be out of the question. He was of average height, but he had a disturbingly long torso. His clothes were baggy, and they didn’t fit his body at all. And to top it all off, he wore a ridiculous tiny cap perched perfectly straight on his head like a soldier. Something was considerably off when it came to his physical coordination, and whether he was throwing a ball or running, he was a total mess when it came to athletic activity. Watching his uncoordinated movement, you couldn’t help but think of a cartoon character. During physical education, even the teachers would sometimes burst out into unintended laughter. In gymnastics, no matter how he clung to the high bar, he couldn’t manage to hoist himself up or even get a single leg over. With a heave, he would lift his rear end partway, but unable to maintain the effort, he would come flopping down, dangle there, and again lift and again fall. Watching Uragawa flounder as he hung from the high bar, anyone might be excused for cracking a smile over the pitiful scene. In the end the teacher always had to give Uragawa’s backside a push, huffing and puffing, to help him up over the bar. If only Uragawa had been able to hold his own when it came to schoolwork, he might have escaped being teased so often, but sadly, he wasn’t particularly good at that either. Furthermore, he had a remarkable ability to fall asleep in class. There was just one thing: no one could keep up with Uragawa at classical literature, no matter how hard they studied. In this one subject alone, his grades were amazing, far and away the best, and he could read the most difficult unannotated work calmly and easily. But to be good at the classics and to enjoy them! Regrettably, from his classmates’ point of view, it seemed like just another joke for someone who couldn’t even do English and math and such to make a specialty of the classics. His classmates, nearly all of them, teased Uragawa. Troublemakers never tired of playing tricks on him and had fun watching his flustered face. “Uragawa, there’s something on your shirt!” they might say, and when he lowered his chin to look down at his chest, they would dump a handful of gravel down the back of his collar. If Uragawa got up from his seat for a minute during penmanship class, he’d return to find that his writing brush had disappeared. While he was under his desk, searching this way and that like a fool, the teacher would come by. “Uragawa, what are you up to now?” The warning would come flying at him. Caught unawares as he was, Uragawa would struggle to reply. “The brush…” “What about the brush?” “I can’t find my brush.” “So you say, but weren’t you just now using it? Look around carefully.” And once Uragawa was back under the desk, hopelessly looking for a brush that was nowhere to be found, just then, from a neighboring seat or the seat in front, a stealthy hand would reach out and restore the brush to its former location. Uragawa would lift his head and spot the brush, and by the time he realized that someone had hidden it, the neighboring students would all be in a state of single-minded concentration, busy with their own brushwork. There was no guessing who’d done it. “How about it? Have you found it?” the teacher might ask. And Uragawa might reply, “Yes, it was on my desk.” “What? That kind of carelessness will land you in trouble, you know.” In the end, every time, Uragawa just suffers the scolding on his own. Everyone teased Uragawa this way because of his funny looks and because he was not really up to par in his schoolwork, but besides that, there was another reason. The reason was that Uragawa’s looks and belongings— really, even the way he laughed and spoke, everything about him—had the air of a country bumpkin and the smell of poverty. Uragawa’s family sold tofu and lived above their shop. His classmates, on the other hand, were the children of well-known businessmen, officials, college professors, doctors, lawyers, and so forth. Among such a group, Uragawa’s upbringing never seemed to measure up, no matter what he did. There wasn’t another student like Uragawa at the school, one whose collars were hand-washed at home instead of being sent out to the laundry, whose handkerchiefs were used hand towels cut in half. If talk turned to baseball games at Jingu Stadium, Uragawa knew only the bleachers and couldn’t talk about the good seats by the infield. When it came to motion pictures, Uragawa knew only the old movie hall on the outskirts of town, while his classmates went to first-class cinemas in the city center. If talk turned to a fine shopping district like the Ginza, Uragawa might go there—maybe— once every two years at best and knew nearly nothing about it, and when the others spoke of their summer resorts and ski lodges and hot springs, he had not a word to say. There was really nothing he could do to keep from being left out of everything in the worst way. Uragawa must have felt lonely, being teased and excluded by everyone, and it must have bothered him. But he also knew that the more lonely and bothered and angry he acted, the harder the teasers would tease. So all he could do was try to respond as little as possible. No matter what anyone did to him, he would soldier on, masking his miserable feelings with a good-natured, lonely smile. Everyone began to think that Uragawa would never get angry no matter what they did to him. And little by little, the teasing became a regular thing. Even so, he tried not to let his feelings show. But when he was really suffering, of course, he didn’t smile. Instead, he would look straight at his tormentor, with eyes that seemed as though tears might well up at any moment, and then, with an air of resignation, simply walk away. But if Uragawa’s eyes were sad at those times, there was not a hint of hatred in them. As he gazed steadily at the other person, his eyes seemed to speak. I bear you no ill will! they seemed to say. I would never want to bother you! So why do you cause me this endless pain? For pity’s sake, let me have a moment’s peace by myself! There was no hatred burning in those eyes, but when a decent person was caught in this gaze, it wasn’t a good feeling. Because it drew out an involuntary remorse for one’s own misdeeds. So although even the good kids in the class joined in and tried teasing Uragawa once or twice, they quickly gave it up. But Yamaguchi and his pals clung to Uragawa to the end and persisted in their cruel games. And then something happened. This, too, was in the autumn of last year. In November, the time came to draft a program for the class assembly. The plan was to start with an opening address, then continue with speeches, readings, and music, and conclude with entertainment, refreshments, and finally, dismissal. Professor Ogawa, who was in charge of the first-year students, ended class early so students could vote on who would perform each role. Ballots were distributed for voting, and the professor turned to Kawase, the class monitor, and asked him to collect them once everyone had finished writing down their choices. Then, saying he had a small matter to attend to, the professor left the room. Before that, he warned everyone that it was still the middle of the period, and they must all be very quiet, since other classes were still receiving instruction. Everyone turned immediately to their paper ballots and started thinking about whom they would choose. Copper, too, as he held his pencil, thought about it for some time. While he was doing that, a “telegram” made the rounds. When someone had something they wanted to communicate quietly during class, they would write it on a small piece of paper, and the students would pass it along under the desks, one by one, and this was called a telegram. Because the professor was not in the room at this time, the note was passed to Copper openly. On the paper, the following was written: let’s make Fried Tofu do the speech He didn’t know who the sender was, but he had no doubt it was one of Yamaguchi’s crowd. It was clearly a plot to get Uragawa to stand up onstage so they could hoot and holler at him and laugh at his confusion and discomfort. Copper barely glanced at the telegram and then passed it on. He himself wanted nothing to do with the plan written there. The little paper made the rounds, from desk to desk in turn. With his paper ballot in front of him, Copper was still perplexed about whom to choose, but suddenly, he remembered that the telegram was making its way around to its very subject. Upon reading the telegram, Uragawa, not knowing to whom the nickname Fried Tofu belonged, was sure to be baffled. I get it. Copper realized what was going on. To confuse him was part of Yamaguchi’s plan. At that point, he looked up, following the path of the telegram with his eyes. Already, the little paper had made its way to within two or three desks of Uragawa. And then, while Copper watched, it was passed into Uragawa’s hand. Copper’s seat was toward the back of the classroom, so he couldn’t see what sort of face Uragawa made when he received the telegram, but Uragawa tilted his head to one side, as if in confusion, and sure enough, it seemed that he didn’t understand its meaning. Yamaguchi, who sat next to Uragawa, twisted back and, looking toward his friends, made sure they saw him stick out his tongue and screw up his face into a grimace. Uragawa, unknowing, passed the telegram to the seat behind him. Yamaguchi stuck his tongue out again. The telegram continued to work its way around the room and eventually came to Yamaguchi’s place. After making a show of being utterly surprised, in a voice loud enough for everyone to hear, he read out the telegram: “‘Let’s make Fried Tofu do the speech,’ it says… but who is this Fried Tofu?” Snickers came from here and there in the classroom. Yamaguchi was in his element. “I wonder who it’s about?” And at that, he swung round toward Uragawa, asking, “Hey, Uragawa—you don’t know, do you?” Uragawa was clearly dismayed. He turned a bewildered face to Yamaguchi and shook his head in apparent embarrassment. “I don’t know.” Yamaguchi’s friends burst out laughing. Others joined in, adding their voices to the laughter. When he heard that, Uragawa must have understood everything, and at that moment his face suddenly flushed. His family business, his own lunch. That was it—Fried Tofu was him! In a flash, he turned bright red. Even from where Copper sat, he could see the red rising all the way up to Uragawa’s ears. At that very moment, Kitami jumped up from his desk like a shot. “Yamaguchi! You coward!” Kitami shouted, beside himself with fury. “Don’t be such a bully!” With a sidelong glance at Kitami, Yamaguchi stuck out his lower jaw and snickered defiantly. Kitami, looking as if he had lost all patience, left his seat and made straight for Yamaguchi. “It was you who started Fried Tofu, wasn’t it? You know that you did!” “Huh? I don’t know anything of the sort!” “Then why were you sticking your tongue out before?” “None of your business!” Before the words had left his mouth, Kitami’s palm flew straight to Yamaguchi’s cheek with a smack. Yamaguchi turned pale. He glared at Kitami, eyes full of hate, and then, out of the blue, suddenly spat at him. It was a direct hit on Kitami’s face. “Let’s go!” shouted Kitami, heaving the full weight of his bulldog body right at Yamaguchi. There was the sound of chairs tipping, the two bodies tangled, and they tumbled down between the desks. Yamaguchi landed faceup, pinned beneath Kitami. Yamaguchi was much taller than Kitami but was no match for him when it came to sheer strength. He tried to push him off, struggling, but was unable to break free, and while the other students watched, he was pummeled repeatedly in the head. Kitami grabbed Yamaguchi by the lapels of his jacket and shook him up and down. His head hit the floor with an audible noise. Up to this point Copper had been able to see by craning his neck, but now the entire class rose as one, and everyone rushed toward the two boys. Copper, too, jumped up and pushed forward, but by then a throng of people had formed a circle around them, and he couldn’t tell what was going on inside it. When he pushed through the crowd and neared his two classmates, he came upon a truly unexpected scene. As before, Yamaguchi was pinned on his back in the narrow space between the two desks. Kitami was still holding him down from above, glaring at him hatefully. But now, behind Kitami, clinging to his back, there was Uragawa. “I’m okay, Kitami! Don’t do it! I’m okay!” While saying this, Uragawa was trying with all his might to restrain Kitami, who was still on the attack. Uragawa’s voice sounded like he was about to burst into tears. “It doesn’t matter! Please—just let him go!” Kawase, the class monitor, was also earnestly trying to calm Kitami. Silent and out of breath, Kitami continued to glare at Yamaguchi. But then the professor’s voice rang out. “Just what is going on here?” A dead silence fell over the classroom, the students glancing sidelong at each other. “Everyone, return to your seats!” As the students filed back to their seats, Kitami and Yamaguchi released each other and stood up. On inspection, Kitami’s hand was bleeding. While Yamaguchi had been pinned, he had dug his fingernails into Kitami’s hand as hard as he could. Kitami had returned to his seat, so Yamaguchi took a seat as well, still fuming. Once the group was seated, Professor Ogawa let loose. “What in the world have you been up to here? After what I said earlier, you start this kind of fuss the moment I’m out of the room! And you expect to become first-rate students? If you were at all mindful of the work going on in other rooms, you’d refrain from this kind of commotion, no matter what the circumstances are. It’s a terrible shame.” The professor went on, looking at both Yamaguchi and Kitami in turn. “It’s not often that people need to settle an argument with violence. What in the world were you arguing about?” The two boys said not a word. “Very well. We’ll talk about that later. Now then, between the two of you, who first lifted a hand against the other? Tell me that.” “I did,” Kitami answered plainly. “Is that right? You had to speak with your fists? You didn’t know how to say it with your mouth—is that it?” “I didn’t think so.” “What in the world caused you to act so rashly? It can’t have been for no reason at all.” “…” “Try to say something, if you can. Why would you act with such violence?” Still, Kitami remained silent. “Please be honest. In starting a fight and creating this commotion, you are thoroughly in the wrong. But you are still young. Your character is still in formation. If you were unable to restrain your anger, you needn’t necessarily be condemned for that. If one were to feel that this act was not entirely without cause or reason, one might in that case expect to see more restraint from you in the future. Now is the time to speak.” Even spoken to in that way, Kitami, face downcast, made no word of reply. Copper didn’t understand why Kitami was keeping silent. If he would just state the plain truth of the matter, then the professor would learn about the rotten behavior of Yamaguchi and his friends, and Kitami would get off without being scolded so badly. “You can’t say it, eh? I see. Well then, Kawase, let’s hear it from you. Tell us exactly what you saw.” As the professor said this, the bell signaling the end of class rang out. At that, the professor told Yamaguchi, Kitami, and Kawase to remain behind, all three of them, while he dismissed the remaining students to the playground. Even after leaving for the playground, Copper couldn’t help but worry about the professor’s investigation. So during recess he remained under the parasol tree by the school doors, talking with Mizutani and waiting for the three students to emerge. The three of them came out just before the next period was to start. First to emerge was Kawase, with a terribly serious look on his face. Everyone gathered around him to ask about the professor’s verdict. The next to come out was Yamaguchi. Yamaguchi’s buddies ran over to him, and they muttered together, but presently they surrounded him and bore him off somewhere, still sulking. The last one out was Kitami. He was whistling as he exited and had a bright expression on his face. Watching him, Copper was relieved. It seemed certain that he had not been scolded much at all. Uragawa ran to Kitami, faster than anyone else. Then he asked him something anxiously but must have heard some good news in response, because he lifted his head and looked happily around at everyone. Until now, Copper had never seen Uragawa with such a bright expression on his face. By Kawase’s telling, it seemed that once all the explanations had been made and the professor understood all the circumstances, Yamaguchi received a severe scolding. Kitami also received a warning, but he wasn’t scolded so heavily. On his way home on the day all this happened, Copper was with Kitami. He asked Kitami why he hadn’t explained himself when the professor questioned him. Kitami replied, “Wouldn’t that make me a rat? I hate that.” He stroked his face with his bandaged hand. When they had come as far as the train station and it was time to part ways, Copper turned to Kitami and said, “This Sunday, do you want to come play at my house? Mizutani is coming, too.”